# Macro Substitution

A definition has the form:

```c
#define name replacement text 
```

It calls for a macro substitution of the simplest kind - subsequent occurrences of the token name will be replaced by the *replacement text*. The name in a `#define` has the same form as a variable name; the replacement text is arbitrary. Normally the replacement text is the rest of the line, but a long definition may be continued onto several lines by placing a `\` at the end of each line to be continued. The scope of a name defined with `#define` is from its point of definition to the end of the source file being compiled. A definition may use previous definitions. Substitutions are made only for tokens, and do not take place within quoted strings. For example, if `YES` is a defined name, there would be no substitution in `printf("YES")` or in `YESMAN`.

Any name may be defined with any replacement text. For example:

```c
#define forever for (;;) /* infinite loop */ 
```

defines a new word, `forever`, for an infinite loop.

It is also possible to define macros with arguments, so the replacement text can be different for different calls of the macro. As an example, define a macro called `max`:

```c
#define max(A, B) ((A) > (B) ? (A) : (B)) 
```

Although it looks like a function call, a use of `max` expands into in-line code. Each occurrence of a formal parameter (here A or B) will be replaced by the corresponding actual argument. Thus the line:

```c
x = max(p+q, r+s); 
````

will be replaced by the line:

```c
x = ((p+q) > (r+s) ? (p+q) : (r+s)); 
```

So long as the arguments are treated consistently, this macro will serve for any data type; there is no need for different kinds of max for different data types, as there would be with functions.

If you examine the expansion of `max`, you will notice some pitfalls. The expressions are evaluated twice; this is bad if they involve side effects like increment operators or input and output. For instance:

```c
max(i++, j++) /* WRONG */ 
```
 
will increment the larger twice. Some care also has to be taken with parentheses to make sure the order of evaluation is preserved; consider what happens when the macro:

```c
#define square(x) x * x /* WRONG */ 
```

is invoked as `square(z+1)`.

Nonetheless, macros are valuable. One practical example comes from `<stdio.h>`, in which `getchar` and `putchar` are often defined as macros to avoid the run-time overhead of a function call per character processed. The functions in `<ctype.h>` are also usually implemented as macros.

Names may be undefined with `#undef`, usually to ensure that a routine is really a function, not a macro:

```c
#undef getchar

int getchar(void) { ... }
```

Formal parameters are not replaced within quoted strings. If, however, a parameter name is preceded by a `#` in the replacement text, the combination will be expanded into a quoted string with the parameter replaced by the actual argument. This can be combined with string concatenation to make, for example, a debugging print macro:

```c
#define dprint(expr) printf(#expr " = %g\n", expr) 
````

When this is invoked, as in:

```c
dprint(x/y) 
```

the macro is expanded into:

```c
printf("x/y" " = %g\n", x/y); 
```

and the strings are concatenated, so the effect is

```c
printf("x/y = %g\n", x/y);
```

Within the actual argument, each `"` is replaced by `\"` and each `\` by `\\`, so the result is a legal string constant.

The preprocessor operator `##` provides a way to concatenate actual arguments during macro expansion. If a parameter in the replacement text is adjacent to a `##`, the parameter is replaced by the actual argument, the `##` and surrounding white space are removed, and the result is re-scanned. For example, the macro `paste` concatenates its two arguments:

```c
#define paste(front, back) front ## back 
```

so :

```c
paste(name, 1) 
```

creates the token `name1`.

The rules for nested uses of `##` are arcane; further details may be found in [Appendix A](../AppendixA/A1.md).

[**Exercise 4-14.**](../Solutions/Chapter4/E4-14.md) Define a macro `swap(t,x,y)` that interchanges two arguments of type `t`. (Block structure will help.)
