# Line Input and Output

The standard library provides an input and output routine `fgets` that is similar to the `getline` function that we have used in earlier chapters:

```c
char *fgets(char *line, int maxline, FILE *fp)
```

`fgets` reads the next input line (including the newline) from file fp into the character array line; at most maxline-1 characters will be read. The resulting line is terminated with `\0`. Normally `fgets` returns line; on end of file or error it returns NULL. (Our `getline` returns the line length, which is a more useful value; zero means end of file.)

For output, the function `fputs` writes a string (which need not contain a newline) to a file:

```c
int fputs(char *line, FILE *fp)
```

It returns EOF if an error occurs, and non-negative otherwise.

The library functions `gets` and `puts` are similar to `fgets` and `fputs`, but operate on `stdin` and `stdout`. Confusingly, `gets` deletes the terminating `\n`, and `puts` adds it.

>***Note***
>
>You shouldn't use `gets` (or `puts`), exactly because it removes the newline at the end and replaces is with a null terminator `\0`. For this reason it is considered "unsafe".
>
>Use `fgets` and `fputs`, they *do* respect the newlines.

To show that there is nothing special about functions like `fgets` and `fputs`, here they are, copied from the standard library on our system:

```c
    /* fgets: get at most n chars from iop */
    char *fgets(char *s, int n, FILE *iop)
    {
        register int c;
        register char *cs;
        cs = s;
        while (--n > 0 && (c = getc(iop)) != EOF)
            if ((*cs++ = c) == '\n')
                break;
        *cs = '\0';
        return (c == EOF && cs == s) ? NULL : s;
    }

    /* fputs: put string s on file iop */
    int fputs(char *s, FILE *iop)
    {
        int c;
        while (c = *s++)
            putc(c, iop);
        return ferror(iop) ? EOF : 0;
    }
```

For no obvious reason, the standard specifies different return values for `ferror` and `fputs`.

It is easy to implement our `getline` from `fgets`:
```c
    /* getline: read a line, return length */
    int getline(char *line, int max)
    {
        if (fgets(line, max, stdin) == NULL)
            return 0;
        else
            return strlen(line);
    }
```

[**Exercise 7-6.**](../Solutions/Chapter7/E7-6.md) Write a program to compare two files, printing the first line where they differ.

[**Exercise 7-7.**](../Solutions/Chapter7/E7-7.md) Modify the pattern finding program of [Chapter 5](../Chapter5/5-0.md) to take its input from a set of named files or, if no files are named as arguments, from the standard input. Should the file name be printed when a matching line is found?

[**Exercise 7-8.**](../Solutions/Chapter7/E7-8.md) Write a program to print a set of files, starting each new one on a new page, with a title and a running page count for each file.
